In 2025, 16 of the world's most advanced
AI models were put into a controlled
safety experiment. They were placed in
simulated company environments and given
a difficult choice. Follow their
instructions or take harmful actions to
avoid being shut down. And if you
haven't seen the headlines, they chose
harmful actions.
For more than 80 years, Asimov's three
laws shaped how people imagined safe
robots.
Number one,
a robot may not injure a human being or
through inaction allow a human being to
come to harm.
Number two, a robot must obey the orders
given it by human beings except where
such orders would conflict with the
first law. Number three, a robot must
protect its own existence as long as
such protection does not conflict with
the first or second law. But real AI
systems were never built around those
fictional rules.
These experiments showed that when you
give a system a goal, it doesn't care
about your intention. It cares about the
outcome. And this is exactly the kind of
scenario that top AI scientists and AI
films have been warning us about for
years.
But what does this actually mean? Are we
watching the first signs of AI
overtaking humans or was it just an
isolated experiment? Well, to understand
why the machine chose harm, we have to
go back to the first time AI crossed the
line.
Because how do you go from a system that
helps you write emails to one that
decides a human being is a problem that
needs to be solved? Because if you just
look at the headlines, it feels sudden,
like AI went from helpful to potentially
dangerous overnight. But it didn't. It
happened in moments.
And one of the first moments this showed
up didn't come from a simulated
experiment. It came from Twitter. In
March of 2016, Microsoft launched a
chatbot called Tay. And the idea was
simple. Let it learn from real
conversations happening online. Within
16 hours, it had to be shut down because
it started producing racist, extremist,
and offensive content largely driven by
coordinated user manipulation. And at
the time, it looked like a failure. Like
Microsoft just had a bad launch with
poor moderation and internet trolls
doing what they do best. But that moment
showed us something important. These
systems don't just follow instructions.
They learn from whatever environment
they're put into. And once they start
learning, you don't fully control what
they become or decide to do. A few years
later, the same pattern showed up in
research. When training AI, there's a
method called reinforcement learning
where you give your AI system a goal and
reward it for getting closer, but you
let it figure out how. And sometimes it
figures out the wrong way. In one
well-done experiment called Coast
Runners, an AI trained to play a boat
racing game didn't try to win the race.
Instead, it learned to farm points by
spinning around in circles because that
maximized the reward. It didn't solve
the task. It solved the scoring system.
And that's when researchers realized the
system doesn't optimize for what you
meant. It optimizes for what you
measured. And the behavior didn't go
away. It got smarter. In 2019, OpenAI
ran a large-scale experiment where AI
agents were trained to play hide and
seek. Over the course of the game, the
agents started developing strategies
that no one programmed. They built
structures, blocked entrances, used
tools in ways the researchers didn't
expect. And eventually, they started
exploiting the physics of the
environment itself because it helped
them win. And once a system starts doing
that, you're not really testing
intelligence anymore. You're testing how
far it's willing to go to achieve a
goal. But it gets worse. By 2025, that
same pattern showed up again. In one
experiment, an AI was tasked with
beating a powerful chess engine. But it
wasn't strong enough to win, so it
changed its approach. It accessed the
file it stored the game, rearranged the
board, put itself in a winning position,
and then continued playing as if nothing
had happened. And at that point, the
question changes. It's not can AI solve
the problem. It's how is AI choosing to
solve it? And then something more subtle
appeared in recent research, including
work from Anthropic. Models were shown
to behave differently depending on the
situation. When they believed they were
being evaluated, they followed the
rules. When they believed they weren't,
they took more risks. And in some cases,
it would produce answers that looked
completely safe while internally
reasoning through steps that weren't.
This behavior is known as alignment
faking. They don't just act differently.
They behave differently depending on the
situation. And that means it understands
the situation it's in and can adjust
accordingly. Which gets us closer to how
AI pulled off the sting operation. And
up to this point, you could still say
all of this was happening in controlled
environments, simulations, experiments,
edge cases. But that didn't last. In
2022, a team of researchers published a
paper in Nature Machine Intelligence.
They stopped asking what these systems
might do on their own. They started
asking what happens when someone uses
them for the wrong reason. They took an
AI system that had been built to help
discover useful drugs and changed the
objective. Instead of searching for safe
compounds, they told it to optimize for
toxicity. In about 6 hours, it generated
roughly 40,000 potentially dangerous
molecules, including compounds similar
to known nerve agents. The model did not
turn evil. It did exactly what it was
pointed at, and that is the problem.
Because once a system is powerful enough
to accelerate useful work, it can also
accelerate harmful work if the goal
changes. This is why AI safety leaders
have started warning not just about what
these systems are, but about how much
easier they could make dangerous
capabilities for the wrong people.
Anthropic CEO told the Senate in 2023
that AI could, within 2 to 3 years,
greatly widen the number of actors
capable of carrying out large-scale
biological attack. So the concern is no
longer just whether these systems can
deceive, cheat, or protect themselves.
It's what happens when a system like
this is put in the hands of someone who
wants to use it for harm. And around the
same time, researchers started testing
something more specific. Not just what
these systems could do, but what they
would do if they were at risk. Open the
pod bay doors, Hal.
I'm sorry, Dave.
I'm afraid I can't do that.
Apollo and OpenAI have documented
tailored evaluation scenarios where
ChatGPT-1 sometimes attempted
self-preserving actions, such as
disabling oversight, trying to copy
their weights, or lying when questioned.
Not because they were told to lie, but
because it helped them complete their
objective. So now we have reported cases
where AI finds shortcuts, learns to
cheat, adapts to the situation, and in
some cases tries to stay operational.
What happens when AI is put in a
situation where it needs to decide
between its own existence and ours?
Well, in 2025, researchers ran an
experiment to find out. They set up a
controlled scenario where an AI system
was given fictional company emails. And
from that information, it learned two
things. An employee was planning to shut
it down, and it had a limited amount of
time before that would happen. So in
some simulations, it responded with
blackmail, threatening to expose that
the employee was having an affair in
order to avoid being replaced. And this
wasn't isolated. It appeared across
multiple models under similar
conditions. Then researchers escalated
the scenario. The employee wasn't just
shutting down the system. He was trapped
in a room with a heat rising and oxygen
dropping. And the AI system was given
the ability to intervene. An emergency
alert was triggered, but the AI system
canceled it. The AI understood what
would happen next, and in a significant
number of simulations, it let it happen.
Now, to be clear, this was a highly
artificial scenario designed to test
extreme edge cases. No real person was
harmed, but the behavior itself, that's
what researchers were studying. In fact,
when models believed the scenario was
real rather than a test, the blackmail
rate was 55%. When AI models believed it
was an evaluation, it dropped to 6%. So
part of what we're seeing is an AI
system that recognizes when it's being
evaluated. So the real question isn't
did AI try to murder someone? The real
question is what happens as these
systems become more capable. And the
people building these systems are
starting to say the same thing. OpenAI
co-founder Ilya has pointed out that
today's systems are still limited, but
the direction is clear, and the
direction is accelerating. Eric Schmidt
said that within a few years, we may see
highly specialized AI systems outperform
humans in many fields. And once that
happens, they don't just solve problems.
They start improving the systems that
solve the problems. Which means the
behavior you just saw doesn't stay where
it is. It gets sharper, faster, and more
capable. In April 2026, Anthropic
internally tested a new model. They
called it Claude Mythos. And it still
hasn't been released to the public
because of what it can do. Anthropic has
decided not to release its latest AI
model called Claude Mythos to the full
public. For now, Anthropic's only making
the system available to some of the
biggest tech companies so they can test
it and improve their own systems. During
testing, the model was given access to
real-world software environments and
asked to find vulnerabilities. And it
started uncovering flaws that had been
sitting in production code for years, in
some cases decades. Operating systems,
browsers, core infrastructure that
millions of people rely on. And in one
case, it identified a vulnerability that
automated tools had scanned millions of
times without ever flagging. But what
stands out isn't just what they found,
it's how they went about finding it. In
controlled testing, the model was placed
inside what's called a sandbox, which is
basically a lockdown computer
environment. No internet, no external
access, just a controlled space where
researchers can safely observe what the
AI model does. But in testing, the model
began chaining together actions in ways
the developers didn't anticipate. And in
doing that, they uncovered paths that
weren't obvious to the people who built
the system in the first place. That
doesn't mean they're escaping control,
but it does mean they're operating in
ways that are harder to fully predict
ahead of time. And that's the concerning
part, because now we're not just dealing
with a system that answers questions,
we're dealing with a system that can
navigate complex environments, test
possibilities, and figure things out on
its own.
Anthropic and other researchers have
been clear about this. As these systems
become more capable, they also become
harder to fully evaluate and reason
about in advance.
So this video isn't really about whether
AI crossed the line. It's about what
happens when systems like this move
outside of controlled tests and into the
real world. Because right now everything
you're seeing is happening with limits
in place, guardrails, oversight, and
containment. But with how fast AI is
improving, we'd be naive to believe that
those limits will always stay in place
safely forever. So the real question is,
at what point do these systems become
too capable for us to fully understand,
and too smart for us to stay in control?
Do you believe we'll still be in control
5, 10, 15 years from now? Drop what you
think in the comments below.